'As recently as 2008, if you look at the situation of British people and European nationals leaving Britain to go to Europe and European nationals coming to Britain, there was actually net negative migration in terms of Europe,' he said.

'We've had an extraordinary five-year period where we've created more jobs than the rest of the European Union put together. Now, that is not a normal period.'

Mr Cameron said he believed the UK economy would continue to be strong, adding: 'I also think that the eurozone economies are recovering.

'You saw growth of 7 per cent in Ireland last year, you see Spain growing, France growing, Germany growing. So the fact is we've had an unnatural period.'

The Prime Minister talks to Charlie Allen, managing director of Shiner, at the company's offices in Bristol this morning

Mr Cameron inspects a skateboard on a campaign visit in Bristol. He has insisted he will not resign as Prime Minister if there is a Brexit vote

Of his net migration target he said: 'It is the right ambition, it is not an unrealistic ambition.

'But we shouldn't leave the EU to achieve the ambition.' 

Mr Cameron pleaded: 'As we try to meet the challenge of immigration, do we want to meet it by leaving the single market and tanking the economy?'

He added: 'We are reopening the freedom of movement directive as of the renegotiation.' 

Mr Cameron denied that Britain was currently 'shackled to a corpse'. 'You can see the European economy's recovery. It's the largest single market in the world,' he said.

The PM insisted the UK had a 'special status' within the EU that should not be given up.

He also repeated his claim that EU migrants could be sent home after six months if they had not found a job. 

'The idea you have to choose between being a success in the European single market of 500 million and campaigning to have jobs and wealth created by trading with other economies - you don't have to choose, you should do both,' he said.

'The vision of Britain in Europe is we do have a special status, we have the best of both worlds.

'We're in that single market, we're driving that single market, there are lots of things that Britain can help Europe to achieve - whether it's tackling terrorism or signing better trade deals in the future - but we have our own special status protected.

James Bond star Daniel Craig (pictured left) revealed his support for Britain staying in the EU after posing in a T-shirt with the slogan: 'No man is an island. No country by itself.'

James Bond star Daniel Craig is the latest celebrity to declare his support for Britain staying in the EU. 

He was pictured last night wearing a white T-shirt with the slogan: 'No man is an island. No country by itself. Vote Remain on 23rd June.' 

The picture of the retiring James Bond in the pro-EU T-shirt was first published by Turner Prize-winning artist Wolfgang Tillmans, who told his Instagram followers that Craig had sent him the picture. 

Minutes after the picture appeared online David Cameron tweeted it along with the words: 'It's great to see Daniel Craig is planning to Vote Remain on Thursday.' 



It delivers another boost to the Remain campaign after the endorsements of David and Victoria Beckham urged voters to support staying in the EU 'for our children'.

The England footballing hero and his fashion designer wife said Britain should be facing the challenges of the world together with its allies. 

He was joined by his former England colleague Rio Ferdinand, who compared EU membership to playing the success they achieved at Manchester United.  

'I'm a deeply patriotic person about this country. We have not been invaded for 1,000 years, we've got institutions that have served us well. I don't want to give that up to some sort of 'United Europe' and that's not what we're going to do.

'We're out of the euro, out of ever-closer union, we're proud Brits and really proud of what our country can achieve, but, frankly, we achieve more if we're in these organisations fighting for British interests and British values rather than standing outside for them.'

After a series of tetchy exchanges with presenter John Humphrys, the PM jibed: 'You will interrupt yourself John in a minute if you don't watch out.' 

Asked if he would continue to be PM regardless of the result, Mr Cameron replied: 'I will accept the instructions of the British people and get to work on Friday morning to deliver them.'

