Other stars also rushed to criticise the decision to leave.

James Corden wrote: 'I can't get my head around what's happening in Britain. I'm so sorry to the youth of Britain. I fear you've been let down today'.

In a play on words BBC star Gary Lineker tweeted: 'U kip for a couple of hours and look what happens. What have we gone and done?'

He added later: 'We should maybe change the "Union Jack" to "I'm alright Jack".' 

Model Alexa Chung tweeted a broken heart emoji while Boy George wrote: 'There's no use crying over spilt milk. We'll just ave (sic) to mek (sic) the best of it!'. 

Another star to speak out was Niall Horan of boy band One Direction - who was not previously known for his political activism.

The 22-year-old singer, who is from Ireland but has been based in Britain since he appeared on The X Factor in 2010, singled out Nigel Farage for criticism as he expressed his upset at the result.

'It's a sad day,' Horan wrote on Twitter. 'The economic impact that this is going to have is definitely going to make those voters regret their decision.

'And I see Farage is talking c**p and telling lies as per usual on telly. Let's see what he does now. He really is a terrible man.

'How can you sway that many people into thinking their health service is going to be funded and when the vote goes your way tell them we shouldn't have said that and it was a mistake? Bulls***.' 



Messages: James Corden said the youth of Britain has been let down - Gary Lineker cited the influence if Ukip and said: 'What have we gone and done?' 





 

Sentiment: Model Alexa Chung tweeted a simple heartbroken emoji as she joined the long queue of stars to tweet  

Singer Lily Allen also took to Twitter to vent her fury and desperation at the result of the Brexit vote.

She posted: 'Well Millennials. We're really f*****.' 

While some celebrities tweeted their despair at the notion of a Brexit, comedians made light of the situation with Ricky Gervais, Hugh Laurie and Frankie Boyle all cracking wise.

Remarking on the resignation of Prime Minister David Cameron, Gervais wrote: 'Relax. Boris Johnson is going to take over now.'

While Laurie focused on the effect the Brexit will have on Britons attending Euro 2016, by writing: 'First hairline crack in the plasterwork: England fans will be paying 25 quid for a bottle of beer by Monday.'

Scottish stand-up Boyle joked that Britons should look for a new home, he said: 'It's important to accept the result and move on, possibly to a new country.'



Rant: One Direction star Niall Horan vented his fury about the Leave campaign on Twitter earlier today



Monthy Python legend Eric Idle remained deadpan and suggested that British Leave voters had made a rod for their own backs.



He simply posted: 'UK. Foot. Shot.'

Millionaire businessman and Apprentice boss Alan Sugar also tweeted his concern about the Brexit.

In particular Lord Sugar spoke of  the financial effects that the country's exit from the EU could have, he wrote: 'I just woke to hear we are out of the EU. Shocked to say the least. I fear for the future. Markets collapsed lets hope temporary.'

Artists, actors and musicians including Benedict Cumberbatch and Helena Bonham Carter  signed a 'luvvies' letter' claiming leaving the EU would make Britain ‘less imaginative’. 



The warning was signed by 250 of Britain's celebrities and says if Britain were to leave the European Union it would become ‘an outsider shouting from the wings’.