Banking giant JP Morgan is reportedly considering moving staff from his London HQ to Paris after today's Brexit vote

Several of the world's biggest banks are already considering sending  thousands of jobs out of Britain after today's Brexit win.

JP Morgan, the globe's biggest investment bank, and BNP Paribas, France's financial giant, are reportedly looking at whether they should now move their London bases to Paris.

But American giant Morgan Stanley has denied rumours that it is planning to move 2,000 investment banking jobs to Frankfurt and Dublin.

It came as British Airways owner IAG  issued a profit warning following the UK's decision to leave the EU.

The company's share price tanked 19 per cent to 425.6p in trading on Friday morning.





City workers  are braced for months of pain as banks and financial institutions begin the process of considering whether to slash jobs or relocate to Europe in the wake of Brexit. 

HSBC and Goldman Sachs all said prior to the vote that thousands of jobs in the City of London could be moved to the continent in the event of Brexit.

Sarah Phillips, partner at solicitors Irwin Mitchell, said the Brexit vote will have a 'big impact' on people working in Britain's financial services sector.

She added: 'Many banks, insurers and fund managers who have large businesses in continental Europe could consider relocating to Paris or Frankfurt and senior staff will either lose their roles or have to move to another country.

'Some global investment banks, such as JPMorgan, have said that Brexit would lead to a significant loss of jobs in the UK.'

HSBC boss Stuart Gulliver said in February that a vote to leave could see 5,000 London-based investment bankers move out of London to Paris. 

Jamie Dimon, head of JP Morgan, said earlier this month that up to 4,000 jobs could be hit.

Although banks have been cautious on Friday in making any brash statements regarding their future plans, experts are forecasting that large scale redundancies could be on the cards.

Virgin founder Richard Branson said today it 'a very sad decision that will do huge damage to Britain's prosperity & Europe's stability'

O2 Telefónica UK chief Ronan Dunne said: 'Whatever we think on IN/OUT, people were simply unconvinced by the case to #Remain. We have failed our citizens rather than them failing us.'
