James Bond star Daniel Craig is the latest celebrity to declare his support for Britain staying in the EU. 

He was pictured last night wearing a white T-shirt with the slogan: 'No man is an island. No country by itself. Vote Remain on 23rd June.' 

The picture of the retiring James Bond in the pro-EU T-shirt was first published by Turner Prize-winning artist Wolfgang Tillmans, who told his Instagram followers that Craig had sent him the picture. 

Minutes after the picture appeared online David Cameron tweeted it along with the words: 'It's great to see Daniel Craig is planning to Vote Remain on Thursday.' 



It delivers another boost to the Remain campaign after the endorsements of David and Victoria Beckham urged voters to support staying in the EU 'for our children'.

James Bond star Daniel Craig (pictured left) revealed his support for Britain staying in the EU after posing in a T-shirt with the slogan: 'No man is an island. No country by itself. Vote Remain on 23rd June'. It came hours after David and Victoria Beckham (pictured right) declared their support for Britain staying in the EU

The England footballing hero and his fashion designer wife said Britain should be facing the challenges of the world together with its allies. 

He was joined by his former England colleague Rio Ferdinand, who compared EU membership to playing the success they achieved at Manchester United.  

'We had to work even harder, and be even more of a team, to get where we wanted to be,' he wrote in the Evening Standard today. 

In a day of sports celebrity endorsements nearly 50 stars - including  former England rugby captain Laurence Dallaglio and marathon champion Paula Radcliffe - wrote a letter arguing: 'We are stronger working together'.

The letter was also signed by sportsmen from all corners of the UK, with former Northern Ireland footballer Neil Lennon and ex-Welsh goalkeeper Neville Southall also among the signatories. 

David and Victoria Beckham endorsed the Remain campaign today, insisting Britain was part of a 'vibrant and connected world' 

The former footballer was seen out in London this afternoon after backing the Remain campaign ahead of Thursday's EU referendum

With polls showing Thursday's historic referendum is too close to call, the Remain campaign will hope the last-minute celebrity endorsements will push them over the line. 

But Crystal Palace chairman Steve Parish blasted the celebrity sporting endorsements as 'the politics of the playground' as he hit out at Premier League chief executive Richard Scudamore for claiming yesterday that all 20 clubs wanted Britain to stay in the EU.