Yesterday, Britain Stronger in Europe released more material from the endorsement of ex-Top Gear hosts Jeremy Clarkson and James May.

In a statement today, Beckham said: 'I'm passionate about my country and whatever the result of Thursday's referendum, we will always be Great. 

'Each side has the right to their opinion and that should always be respected whatever the outcome of the European Referendum.

'I played my best years at my boyhood club, Manchester United. I grew up with a core group of young British players that included Ryan Giggs, Paul Scholes, Nicky Butt and the Neville Brothers.

'Added to that was an experienced group of older British players such as Gary Pallister, Steve Bruce and Paul Ince.

'Now that team might have gone on to win trophies but we were a better and more successful team because of a Danish goalkeeper, Peter Schmeichel, the leadership of an Irishman Roy Keane and the skill of a Frenchman in Eric Cantona.'

Beckham said he had been 'privileged' to play and live in Paris, Madrid and Milan during his career, together with team mates from around the world.

He added: 'Those great European cities and their passionate fans welcomed me and my family and gave us the opportunity to enjoy their unique and inspiring cultures and people.

Mr Cameron welcomed the Beckham intervention in an interview with ITV's Lorraine today, insisting Britain had to be part of the European team 

'We live in a vibrant and connected world where together as a people we are strong. For our children and their children we should be facing the problems of the world together and not alone.

'For these reasons I am voting to Remain.'

Mr Cameron today told ITV's Lorraine: 'There was a very moving statement today from David Beckham talking about his children and saying how effectively, what he said to me was, 'you can't win in Europe, unless you're on the pitch', and that's true.

'I worry about that as Prime Minister, I know that we sit around the table [with Europe] and make decisions about security and safety and fighting terrorism and all the rest of it, fighting climate change.

'And if we leave they don't stop meeting and making decisions that affect us, but they'll be making decisions about us but without us in the room and that would be bad for Britain.' 