'Those pushing us to leave the EU, Conservative MPs like Iain Duncan Smith, Boris Johnson and Michael Gove, say that more money could be spent on the NHS if we left, they've also promised more money for farming, for fishing, for university research, for tax cuts. They've promised our EU contribution over and over again.

'Now they want to use people's real concerns about the impact of EU migration to turn the campaign into a referendum on immigration.

John Cryer (pictured), chair of the Parliamentary Labour party group of MPs, announced he was voting for Britain to leave the EU 

'It's easy to blame people who come to this country, to blame the outsider, to blame bureaucrats in Brussels. It's also very convenient for politicians too. If you're blaming a scapegoat you're not blaming the people with the real power, the corporate elite and the politicians in government who do its bidding.'

The Labour leader claimed there was 'very little debate' about immigrants driving down wages in the 1950s and 1960s because there were powerful employment and trade union protections.

He went on: 'The veteran Labour MP Dennis Skinner talked yesterday in Parliament about Shirebrook. For many years that site was a coal mine where eastern European miners worked alongside English colleagues, doing the same job, earning the same pay and in the same union.

'Today that same site is owned by Mike Ashley's Sports Direct, where he employs 200 full-time employees and 3,000 people, mainly eastern Europeans, on zero-hours contracts.

'Today we have a deregulated labour market that allows unscrupulous employers to undercut local pay by exploiting migrant workers and undercut good businesses by forcing a race to the bottom.

'So migrants aren't driving down wages. Unscrupulous employers are because the Government allows them to.'

Mr Corbyn spoke as part of a Labour blitz for Remain, with former prime minister Gordon Brown insisting there is 'no road to full employment' if Britain quits the EU.

In a speech to win over the 'anxious majority' who are struggling to make up their minds about how to vote in the June 23 referendum, the ex-Labour leader insisted jobs are safer if the UK remains in.

He told an event in Manchester: 'There is no road to full employment in Britain, there is no road to increasing the number of jobs massively in our economy and getting the jobs of the future that doesn't lead through the European Union.'
