Billionaire financier George Soros, who earned fame for betting against the pound in 1992, said that a vote for Brexit would trigger a 'Black Friday'

A Brexit vote on Thursday could produce a 'Black Friday' as markets react in horror to instability caused by the result, a billionaire who famously bet against the pound and won in the 1992 crash warned today.

George Soros forced then prime minister John Major to pull Britain out of the 'European Exchange Rate Mechanism' in 1992, sparking chaos in the markets on a day that went down in history as 'Black Wednesday'.

Mr Soros today claimed the collapse in the value of the pound on Friday could be even bigger if Britain votes for Brexit and he warned it would leave people poorer.

Currency and stock markets have been on a roller-coaster ride during the referendum campaigning, plunging over the past fortnight as a succession of polls showed a Brexit lead.

But as market hopes of a Remain vote were raised yesterday, the FTSE100 index soared and the pound had one of its strongest days since the 2008 financial crisis.



Chancellor George Osborne doubled down on his succession of grim economic warnings over Brexit last night as he refused to rule out that the stock market could even need to be suspended on Friday.

And Mr Osborne - who last week said an 'emergency budget' featuring punishing tax rises and spending cuts would be needed after Brexit - even claimed redundancies could be made by the end of the week.

Mr Soros' warning today could send new shudders through markets today as opinion polls show a race which is going down to the wire.  



Mr Soros used Quantum Fund in 1992 to bet successfully that sterling was overvalued against the Deutsche Mark.

Writing in the Guardian, Mr Soros said after Brexit, the pound would fall by at least 15 percent, and possibly more than 20 per cent, to below $1.15 from its current level of around $1.46.

He said: 'The value of the pound would decline precipitously.

'It would also have an immediate and dramatic impact on financial markets, investment, prices and jobs.

'I would expect this devaluation to be bigger and also more disruptive than the 15 percent devaluation that occurred in September 1992, when I was fortunate enough to make a substantial profit for my hedge fund investors.'

Chancellor George Osborne, pictured yesterday after a remembrance service for Jo Cox, last night refused to rule out closing the stock market on Friday in reaction to a Brexit vote 

Mr Soros, ranked as the world's 23rd richest person by Forbes magazine with a fortune of $24.9 billion, said the Bank of England would not cut rates after a British exit.

He warned there would be few monetary policy tools left to ease a recession or a fall in British house prices.

He also pointed to the 'very large' current account deficit in the United Kingdom and said a post-Brexit devaluation would be unlikely to improve manufacturing as trading conditions would be too uncertain to undertake new investments or hire workers.

Hungarian-born Mr Soros said the scale of the sterling devaluation would compare with 1967, when then-Prime Minister Harold Wilson devalued the pound to $2.40 from $2.80.

Speculators, Mr Soros said, would be eager to exploit a Brexit situation to profit.

He said: 'Today, there are speculative forces in the markets much bigger and more powerful.

'And they will be eager to exploit any miscalculations by the British government or British voters.

'Brexit would make some people very rich - but most voters considerably poorer.
