David Cameron issued a statement from a podium in Downing Street to call on British people not to quit the EU, as he warned that the results of Thursday’s referendum would be “irreversible”.

Two days before the EU referendum, the prime minister made a plea to the nation, saying he wanted to speak directly to people of his generation, and older, to persuade them to consider the impact on younger people.

“I know Europe isn’t perfect,” he said, adding that he understood those frustrations and felt them himself. But he urged older voters to think of the “hopes and dreams of your children and grandchildren”.

He added: “Remember they can’t undo the decision we take. If we vote out that is it. It is irreversible. We will leave Europe for good and the next generation will have to live with the consequences for far longer than the rest of us.”

The Conservative leader urged voters to “remember how far we’ve come as a country, and for you, for the family, and for the future of our country, vote remain”.

He argued: “Of this I am convinced. Indeed, of this, every living prime minister, whether Labour or Conservative, is convinced. Britain is better off inside the EU than out on our own.” The single market was at the heart of his argument, he said.

He said on Thursday the conversations across the country would end and instead each voter would be on their own inside a polling booth, where they should consider the risks to jobs, to families and to their children’s future.

Cameron said he would not be urging the nation to vote to remain if he did not believe the country was safer and stronger cooperating with its allies and friends inside the EU. He said he had been prime minister for six years and that experience had made him feel strongly about the need to remain in the EU.

“There is no going back,” he said, arguing that national security was his top responsibility. “Our membership of the EU helps me. I’ve seen firsthand in these dangerous times how we can better cooperate with our friends and neighbours, how we can share information, track terrorists down.”

He said with allies such as Germany and France, Britain was more effective at facing down threats. “We are safer in Europe than out on our own.” Staying in the EU “with 27 countries behind us”, meant the UK could be more of a leader on foreign policy and in tackling climate change. He said membership amplified Britain’s voice.