Europe is an idea. It’s better than that – it’s a noble idea. The many countries of a small continent club together, sharing common values and common interests, to solve problems, break down barriers and live better than they would and could otherwise. The immediate impetus in the 1950s was the avoidance of European conflict; today, the EU’s anti-fascist, anti-war roots still count but more important is the European Union’s capacity to offer each country more heft in political, economic and social affairs that it would have by itself.

Thus, British workers have more rights than they otherwise would. There are more good jobs in our factories than there otherwise would be – and more in the City of London, too. New companies starting up have the whole of the European single market at their feet. Beaches are cleaner, tourist flights cheaper and mobile phone charges lower. Farmers’ incomes are higher and more predictable. Fish stocks in the North Sea are rising. Scientists drive forward frontier science more efficiently. We can monitor and catch potential terrorists more easily.

When multinationals abuse their power, they can be challenged more effectively. Europe can deal with the US and China on level terms and make a volatile, uncertain global political environment just that bit safer. But, best of all, we are part of a European club that is trying to make our world better.

Certainly, each country gives up some sovereignty, just as any members of any club agree to rules. Of course there is a secretariat – a small civil service on the same scale as Birmingham’s – to drive the club forward. But it is run by elected politicians from members of the club and held accountable to representatives elected to the European parliament. It is open to scrutiny by the media and judicial arrangements of each member country.

It is work in progress, but this is a well-intentioned, democratic, accountable structure dedicated to improving the lot of ordinary Europeans – and it does surprisingly well.

The referendum is a battle not just for an idea of Europe, but for an idea of Britain. It can hardly do other than inflame emotions. Add immigration, with all the complexities of disentangling justifiable concerns from the unjustifiable – not a task Ukip leader Nigel Farage wants to begin to undertake – and the climate becomes toxic.

Brexit would not herald a new dawn. As John Major has argued, we export six times as much to the EU as to Brazil, Russia, China and India added together. We export five times as much to the EU as to all the other 52 members of the Commonwealth added together. We sell more services to tiny Luxembourg than to India. The “experts”, derided by Leave, when they warn of recession and years of lost opportunity as Britain tries to redirect its trade, are only stating the obvious.

The millions of working-class voters thinking of voting Brexit, beware. Immigrants, who boost our economy, are not the cause of our ills. The lack of cheap social housing, the underinvestment in public services, the non-building of roads, the inability of weakened trade unions to defend wages and the wider failure to develop vigorous local economies are not the EU’s fault. What is wrong is minted in Britain and must be put right here.

Moreover, the values that will make our lives better are mutuality and generosity – not telling others to go home and turning our backs on the noble if derided EU. To leave is to indulge the worst side of our natures, to believe fantasies about what constitutes democracy and to chase an economic chimera. To remain is a double win – to be part of something good and get richer in the process. Think before you vote.
