David Cameron has accused leave campaigners of stoking intolerance and division with extreme warnings on immigration, and said Britain will be seen as a more “narrow, insular and inward-looking” country if it votes to leave the EU.

In an interview with the Guardian two days before the referendum, the prime minister said all sides of the leave campaign had “become very narrowly focused” on immigration and that the decision could carry consequences.

“I’ve always believed that we have to be able to discuss and to debate immigration. But I’ve always believed that this is an issue that needs careful handling,” he said, speaking in his Downing Street office on Tuesday before embarking on a final 24 hours of campaigning.

“We are talking to a country that has a lot of people who have fled persecution and contribute a massive amount to our country. It does need great care.”

Describing the UK as “arguably the most successful multi-ethnic, multi-faith, opportunity democracy anywhere on earth”, Cameron said a remain vote would represent a step forwards, sending “a very clear message that we’ve rejected this idea that Britain is narrow and insular and inward-looking”.

He hit back at leading leave campaigners by name, including his former adviser Steve Hilton, saying he had been wrong to claim that government officials had told him “directly and explicitly” that a target to reduce net migration to the tens of thousands was not deliverable under EU free movement rules.

“When [Hilton] left in 2012, net migration was falling. The figures were 244,000 in 2010 and by the autumn of 2012 it was down to 154,000, so it was falling towards that ambition,” Cameron said.

He also singled out Nigel Farage, saying the Ukip leader’s unveiling of a poster last week showing refugees fleeing to Slovenia under the words “breaking point” was a “bit of a moment” in the campaign. “I think people looked at that and just thought ‘eurgh’,” he said, claiming Farage was trying to “blame and scapegoat” people.

“The motivation was just so obvious, that it was an attempt to divide and breed intolerance for political benefit, and it was the wrong approach.”

Asked about the tactics of Conservative colleagues in the Vote Leave campaign, such as Michael Gove and Boris Johnson, Cameron suggested they had switched their emphasis from the economy to concentrate on immigration.

“I think their campaign has become very narrowly focused,” he said, criticising their decision to suggest that Turkey would join the EU, which he has said is a lie.

“I obviously didn’t start the campaign making that argument,” he added.

Cameron said he hoped to be able to return to Brussels after a remain vote to push for more reform around freedom of movement, using the scale of support for Brexit to show that people wanted action.

“I think reform doesn’t end on 23 June. The voice of reform will be strengthened, because we will have had a referendum.”

Cameron’s efforts to persuade the public to vote to stay in the EU may be boosted by a warning from the UK’s biggest carmaker, Jaguar Land Rover, that its annual profits could take a £1bn hit by the end of the decade if Britain backs Brexit.
