Europe works when its nations act in concert

I have spent nearly 30 years of my life in the United Kingdom and have, consequently, welcomed Britain into my heart, following in the footsteps of my father, Paul Tortelier.

After my debut performance with him back in 1962 at the Proms, I had the privilege to conduct almost every major British orchestra, relationships which I am still nurturing today as both principal guest conductor at the Royal Academy of Music and conductor emeritus of the BBC Philharmonic.

Although I may not speak as a British citizen, my strong rapport with Britain entitles me perhaps to a few words in favour of this country remaining in the EU, if only in the name of entente cordiale.

First of all, the European Union has been built democratically. Some Brexit campaigners still ignore the existence of the European parliament, which, perhaps ironically, provides support for members of parties such as Ukip and the Front National, which notably oppose the EU. This amounts to an excess of democracy rather than the contrary.

Rarely have I heard people talk about Europe other than in the context of the exclusive interests of Britain. Yet the European Union’s very inception was rooted in mutual understanding, common interest and peace: three ambitious and challenging yet not unattainable goals, and it troubles me also listening to arguments from the leave campaign, their case being construed to the effect that nothing European was ever good enough for Britain.

Quite apart from England’s legitimate and visceral insularity, I find upsetting the reactionary tone with which many Eurosceptics refer to a “Brussels dictatorship” or a “bankrupt euro”, or admonish Greece for “not being worthy of its membership”, with some contempt for the other 27 countries (450 million people). Such expressions as “them or us” and “let’s take Britain back” are rather offensive if not Trumpesque.

Having travelled all my life, I haven’t noticed that Italians, Germans, Swedes or the French have lost an ounce of their indigenous character over the past 50 years. Anyhow, for all this talk of collapse, Greece is still part of the EU, rightly so, and a number of countries within the EU have actually fared very well. All this, after the worst financial crisis since 1929 which, we seem to forget, was entirely Anglo-Saxon-made and affected the whole world. Moreover, the two biggest economies, the US and China, are recommending that Britain stay in.

Of course the problems that our 28 countries are facing together are extremely challenging – but could anyone envisage a less humanistic, encompassing and forward-looking political era than one led by Nigel Farage and Marine Le Pen or – even better – this renaissance man Donald Trump? Unfortunately this is no joke. Dare I hope that on 23 June, the British people will remain in the European Union.Yan Pascal TortelierLondon

• I find it hard to know which set of statistics on Europe to believe. What surprises and disappoints me is that the debate has been pursued at a hypothetical level, with little talk of the idea of Europe. If we leave Europe, the war in Syria will not stop. If we leave Europe, people in Turkey and Libya, prepared to risk their lives in rickety boats, will not suddenly opt to stay at home. If we leave Europe, people in Afghanistan, whose lives are so terrible that they walk to Calais, will not stop walking.

Relationships in Europe have never been easy. Leave or remain, they never will be. Since the end of the second world war, warring nations have been trying to solve shared problems together. With improved results. Surely we are better off working from within.Tim Pigott-SmithLondon
