A slogan is not a detailed plan,” said Khan, a rhetorical punch that landed (in spite of being, in itself, a slogan rather than a detailed plan). David Dimbleby tried to rein-in his fellow member of the Bullingdon Club when his answers overran. But Khan and Davidson were more effective in their pincer movement. Johnson was supported by the Labour MP, Gisela Stuart, and Andrea Leadsom, minister of state for energy since the election. But the remain team concentrated its fire almost exclusively on the leave camp’s superstar general.

“Boris, you should know better,” the mayor said to his predecessor, more in sorrow than in anger. Then he accused leave of masterminding “project hate” in its handling of immigration – the strong insinuation being that Johnson and Michael Gove might disown Nigel Farage’s deplorable “Breaking Point” poster, but were surreptitiously happy to harvest any votes it yielded. This was risky terrain, of course. But Khan was at his most confident when listing the groups of EU migrants who contribute to British public services – and thanking them.

Whether or not Gladys Bramall, who has given £600,000 to leave, was a member of the BNP by choice, or simply because her husband signed her up, is a question that hovered over tonight’s debate and will haunt what is left of the campaign. Leave cannot afford to be seen as the gentrified face of bigotry.

Nor should it imply that the EU is about to welcome Turkey into the fold when this is simply not the case. This “big, fat lie”, as Khan called it, is starting to rebound on the Brexiteers. So it should. And every little helps from now on. As the campaign turns the last bend, this was no less than a pageant of a photo-finish ending.

For remain, Frances O’Grady focused squarely on workplace rights. Sadiq Khan and Ruth Davidson were more pugilistic, Khan damning leave’s “project hate” on immigration, and Ruth Davidson bunching all the unanswered financial questions – the replacement for the single market, the imaginary new jobs, the response to the post-Brexit crisis – into rhetorical threes.