As a scientist, I know the immense value of collaboration. So I will vote Remain.


My father-in-law, Charlie George, died last week. He was 98 and a very fine man; someone our country could be proud of. He fought in the second world war, and his memories of those desperate times remained vivid until the end. But the European Union changed all that; we’ve had peace in Europe for over seventy years by cementing our relationships through trade, cooperation and shared values. We all have a stake in the Nobel Peace Prize which was awarded to the EU institutions in 2012. So why do so many feel that the UK’s prospects would be brighter as an isolated island?

To paraphrase Monty Python, what has the EU ever done for us? For a start, we’ve created the world’s biggest single market for over 500 million people. We’ve introduced safety and environmental standards that all those who trade with us have to meet. EU citizens enjoy workers’ rights that some parts of the world can only dream of and we have a powerful legislative machinery to continue to push for better air quality, greater safety and sustainability in manufacturing and business, reduced greenhouse gas emissions and more personal freedoms.

What is it among these progressive measures that the Brexiteers would wish to repeal? Such achievements cannot be delivered by small countries on their own. And in the UK, we benefit from every single one of them.

When did we become so sloppy in our thinking to believe that the pressures on our health or educational services, in a country of 65 million, are due to 330,000 immigrants a year, just over half of which are from the EU? The same immigrants who the Office of National Statistics tells us contribute more to our economy than they receive. We seem to be suffering from a mass delusion and we need to snap out of it soon.

I have benefited greatly from seeing the European Commission from the inside, having spent three years as chief scientific adviser to President Barroso. It is an amazing institution, delivering a huge amount for citizens across twenty-eight member states, with fewer employees than Birmingham City Council. It isn’t perfect or entirely democratic – both features it shares with our own civil service – but UK leadership is highly valued by the Commission, and we can and do influence its work.

In my own area, I have seen how science, engineering and technology have benefitted from EU investment. We in the UK attract a high proportion of these funds and draw the best minds in the world to work here, to take advantage of shared opportunities, research funding, free movement of researchers and outstanding infrastructure provided by the EU. This is what our future economic success relies upon.

So why are we now engaged in the most desperate display of shoddy, partial analysis of information? The political environment in the UK is in disarray, with no trusted leadership on either side of the argument. The focus that many media outlets place on personalities, rather than provision of information or clarification of arguments, has impoverished the debate even further.

We have one week left to listen carefully to the full spectrum of evidence and choose what sort of future we want. For me the choice is clear. I want to live in a country I can be proud of, which is creative, imaginative and demonstrates global leadership, which values peace and stability in Europe, and acknowledges both our troubled history and the value of working in partnership to invent a better future. Our EU membership enables us to be full partners in this common project.

If the UK leaves, I fear that we condemn ourselves to irrelevant obscurity. As a scientist, I have seen at first-hand the value of European collaboration and the benefits it delivers. I also know the value of evidence. On 23 June, I hope the overwhelming majority of UK citizens will join me in voting Remain.