'You can change the whole course of European history – and if you vote Leave, I believe that change will be overwhelmingly positive.

'If we vote Remain, we stay locked in the back of the car, driven by someone with an imperfect command of English, and going a direction we don't want to go.' 

Employment minister Priti Patel (pictured) has been one of the most aggressive Out campaigners who have attacked government policy despite being a Cabinet minister herself, but Justice Secretary Michael Gove - a close friend of Mr Cameron - has not held back from criticising the Government's record

Mr Johnson said a Remain vote would do nothing to 'rebuke the elites in Brussels' or allow Britain to set up a trade deal with America, China or India.

And in a clear dismissal of Mr Cameron - who just last night insisted Britain was better in the room, at the negotiating table, Mr Johnson said: 'We are not more powerful, or more influential for being around the table in Brussels.

'Look at the pitiful results of the so-called renegotiation earlier this year. We are drowned out.

'And it is an illusion to think that if we vote to Remain, we are somehow opting for the status quo.

'The status quo is not on offer. If we stay in, we will be engaged willy-nilly in the desperate attempt to keep the euro together, by building an economic government of Europe.' 





Mr Johnson said he wanted to hand 'power back to the people' because democracy was the 'best way of correcting the errors of our people'.

He said: 'Now is the time to believe in ourselves, and in what Britain can do, and to remember that we always do best when we believe in ourselves.

'Of course we can continue to provide leadership and support for Europe – but inter-governmentally, outside the supranational EU system.

'I hope you will vote Leave, and take back control of this great country's destiny; and if we Vote Leave, then all our votes will count for more in the future.

'This chance will not come again in our lifetimes, and I pray we do not miss it.'