The Leave campaign has switched the focus of the debate from the economy to immigration, arguing that leaving the EU would enable Britain to regain control of its borders.

One of Britain’s most senior military figures has made a dramatic U-turn on the EU referendum and is now backing the Leave campaign.

Former head of the Armed Forces, Field Marshal Lord Guthrie of Craigiebank, said that he is concerned about the EU’s aspiration of creating a European army.

Earlier this year, the former Chief the Defence Staff signed a letter published by Downing Street calling for Britain to remain in the EU but has now changed his mind, saying that he had ‘made a mistake’. In an interview with the Daily Telegraph, he said: ‘There’s a feeling that those backing the European army are doing it for political reasons rather than military ones,’ he told The Daily Telegraph. ‘That is dangerous.’

Lord Guthrie, who served in the Persian Gulf, East Africa, Northern Ireland, Aden and Malaysia, said a European army would result in the British forces becoming ‘damaged and therefore less useful to our country.’ He also disputed the claim that the EU had been responsible for keeping the continent at peace since the Second World War and could help control aggression from Vladimir Putin’s Russia.

He said: ‘Many European politicians like to say that it was the EU which made everything peaceful. It was not: it was the leadership of the Americans.

‘I feel more European than I do American, but…when things get really serious, we need the Americans.

‘That’s where the power is. If the Americans had been around at the time of the Ukraine events, I doubt whether Putin would have dared be so bold.’ Lord Guthrie signed the Downing Street letter in February to show his support for staying in the EU.

However, last month, 12 former forces chiefs claimed Britain’s military would be more effective outside the EU.

They said that Nato is responsible for peace across Europe, not the EU.

And in a shattering blow to No 10, one of Britain’s most respected generals said EU law had seriously undermined the country’s combat effectiveness. General Sir Michael Rose said service personnel are in danger of becoming ‘no more than civilians in uniform’. 