Boris Johnson today said he would apologise if he proved to be wrong about Brexit causing a recession but insisted he did not think it would happen 

Boris Johnson today said he would apologise publicly if Brexit caused a recession but insisted Britain had nothing to fear from quitting the EU.

The ex-London Mayor has rejected an economic consensus which has strongly warned against voting for Brexit on Thursday.

David Cameron and George Osborne made the extraordinary claim in the middle of the campaign that Britain would be voting for a 'DIY recession' if it backed Brexit.

Treasury forecasts suggest anything from a mild to a severe recession is possible after a Brexit vote - but found now evidence for the possibility Brexit would provoke growth because of the uncertainty it would cause.

Mr Johnson was challenged today during a live radio interview on whether he would be 'humble' enough to apologise if he won the referendum but proved to be wrong about the economy.

Answering questions on LBC, the Vote Leave champion said: 'Of course I will.'

He added: 'This is far more important any individual political career or politician. I don't think that London has anything to fear from coming out of the EU, this is the most extraordinary economy, and nor does Britain.

'Britain is the fifth biggest economy in the world, we have the opportunity to do new trade deals.

'When has our country ever gone wrong in believing in ourselves or our democratic institutions?'

Pressed again on an apology, Mr Johnson said: 'I've always been pretty humble about everything.

'I think the current gloom is actually being induced by Project Fear and the nonsense coming from the Remain campaign - I think they are talking the country down.'

Mr Johnson suggested Downing Street had been threatening businesses to ensure support for the Remain campaign.





He said: 'I do not wish in any way to be disparaging or critical of my friends in government, but it is well known that there is an operation in Downing Street.

'You will get a call from certain gentlemen and they will say 'We want to continue to have contracts with you', or 'It's very important we want to continue friendly relations', there's the honours system, all this kind of thing ... There's a bit of leaning on.

'And the heroism of people therefore like [Anthony] Bamford and [James] Dyson [who have come out for Leave] is very remarkable.'
