British schools face an influx of 261,000 children from the EU if Remain wins, Brexit campaigners claimed last night.

Vote Leave warned the figure could swell to 571,000 by 2030 if all five states up for EU membership – Albania, Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Turkey – join in the near future.

Priti Patel, a Tory cabinet minister, said the extra demand would put pressure on already 'overstretched' schools.

British schools face an influx of 261,000 children from the EU if Remain wins, Brexit campaigners claimed last night. Vote Leave warned the figure could swell to 571,000 by 2030 if all five states up for EU membership – Albania, Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Turkey – join in the near future

As the referendum campaign headed into its final day:

Vote Leave said the increase in school-age European nationals was likely to add between £1billion and £1.9billion to the cost of the UK's annual education budget by 2030.

The campaign calculates that between 2000 and 2014, some 152,000 school-age migrants came to the UK from other EU countries.

David Cameron’s former adviser refused to back down last night as the PM refuted claims he was warned four years ago it was ‘impossible’ to keep his net migration promises while Britain remained in the EU.

But Mr Hilton – who made his claims in yesterday’s Mail – stuck to his guns. He said he had been in No 10 when officials delivered ‘projections that showed there was no way we could meet the target within the EU’.

Justice Secretary Michael Gove backed Mr Hilton last night. He said: ‘Making promises and then saddling yourself with a political union that means you cannot deliver those promises doesn’t contribute to an atmosphere of trust in politics.’

In 2014 alone, the figure stood at 25,000. This is a seven-fold increase on the 3,000 children who came in 2004 – the year Poland and seven other Eastern European countries joined the EU.

A continued annual influx of this size would require the equivalent of about 27 new average-sized secondary schools – or 100 primary schools.

The number of school-age children with one or more parent from a non-UK European nation has more than doubled from 309,000 in 2007 to 699,000, said Vote Leave.

Based on its own estimates of future immigration if the UK remains in the EU, the campaign group calculated that at least a further 261,000 could join the school system over the coming 15 years – or as many as 571,000 if the union expands.

Miss Patel said: 'The EU is undemocratic and interferes too much in our daily lives.

'We have seen that with the scale of migration, and the impact this has had on local communities – and key public services such as the NHS, housing and schools.

'With more countries waiting to join the EU, including Albania, Serbia, and Turkey – and with British taxpayers paying almost £2billion to help them join – this problem can only get worse.'

The warning on Europe's borders came from Sebastian Kurz, Austria's foreign minister.

Priti Patel (pictured), a Tory cabinet minister, said the extra demand would put pressure on already 'overstretched' schools

'The fact is that we have lost control,' said Mr Kurz. 'At the moment it is not us as the EU that is deciding who comes into Europe, it is the people smugglers.'

Mr Kurz, who is a conservative, said the only way to tackle the crisis was to stop accepting illegal arrivals. They should instead be taken away to camps in Africa or elsewhere.

The number of EU citizens granted UK passports has surged by 29 per cent in a year in the run-up to the referendum.
