Who'd want to be shackled to an economic catastrophe like this? Thought the Eurozone nightmare was over? You're terrifyingly wrong, says City Editor ALEX BRUMMER. The worst could be yet to come...

The ‘Remain’ campaign has tried to scare us to death about the terrible damage which will be done to the British economy if we leave the European Union.

What no one has explained, however, is that the majority of our partners in Europe — 19 out of the 28 nations — are members of the eurozone which is delivering an economic catastrophe of historic proportions.

Instead, the Remain camp has resorted to talking down the performance of Britain’s economy post-Brexit, without any reference to the parlous state of the eurozone. The more negative the language ‘Project Fear’ has used, the more it damages and confuses businesses and consumers, and the more it therefore becomes a self-fulfilling prophesy.

In warning citizens of the dangers of a ‘Leave’ vote, the Prime Minister David Cameron and Chancellor George Osborne have resorted to the most negative forecasts in living memory about the prospects for Britain.

Unemployment: Spain (pictured, file image) is now showing signs of recovery, yet youth unemployment there remains staggeringly high at 46 per cent

Cameron has claimed that Brexit would put a ‘bomb’ under the UK economy, and Osborne says that leaving Europe would ‘crash’ the economy.

Yet perhaps they should look closer at the economic bloc they are trying to shackle us to. In a harsh new report on the eurozone, the International Monetary Fund says that ‘growing political divisions and Euroscepticism have weakened prospects for collective action, leaving the euro area increasingly vulnerable to a number of risks’.

In other words, the home-grown problems of Continental Europe are so serious that the eurozone could be in danger of collapse, irrespective of what happens in this week’s referendum.

Unemployment across the region stands at an alarming 10 per cent, more than twice that in Britain. Financial and industrial output in many EU countries has been stagnating or falling for several years.

That in turn makes those countries increasingly poor markets for Britain’s exporters. Budget deficits and debt are also piling up in the eurozone, rendering several countries close to bankruptcy.

Most dangerous of all, the banking system has been holed below the waterline with an enormous pile of bad debts which are far in excess of the rescue funds set up by Brussels to combat the problem.

The truth for Britain is that being part of this deeply flawed market can only harm and worsen our prosperity.

Eight years have passed since the worst global financial crisis for a century, and many banks across Europe are so damaged that they are still unable to lend.

The International Monetary Fund says that bad loans by the banks — those which are unlikely ever to be paid back — stand at an astonishing €900 billion (£700 billion).

The biggest calamity is in Italy, which accounts for the largest amount of rotten lending, with €200 billion (£155 billion) of loans made to companies that are broke. The world’s oldest commercial bank, Monte dei Paschi di Siena, has been rescued by the authorities at least twice, and is drowning in a sea of festering loans.

Near-bankrupt Greek banks are also weighed down with bad loans, and are being kept afloat with cash supplied by the European Central Bank in Frankfurt.

Even Germany is not immune: the country’s biggest lender, Deutsche Bank, lost €6.7 billion (£5.2 billion) last year. Banks are, of course, the life support system for national economies, providing the loans and the credit needed by business and consumers to support growth.

That’s why small businesses in particular have been strangled by the inability of the European banks to serve their needs, which in turn is crushing enterprise, investment and growth.

Belatedly, the European Central Bank has sought to re-float the banking system by pumping €40 billion (£31 billion ) of free money into the system each month, in the hope of reviving lending.

Yet the massive ‘quantitative easing’ programme is struggling to make any difference at all. Now, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has warned that ‘left unaddressed’, the mounting problems of eurozone banks could lead to ‘systemic risk’ — a posh phrase for Europe-wide collapse.

Stagnation: Much of Europe has barely grown in economic terms since the crisis in the single currency erupted in Greece (pictured, May last year) in 2009

Much of Europe has barely grown in economic terms since the crisis in the single currency erupted in Greece in 2009. The collapse in output has been especially catastrophic for the people of Greece, who have seen a staggering 27 per cent loss of national wealth despite a series of bail-outs by the IMF, European Central Bank and Brussels. It is by no means alone.

Since the launch of the euro in 1999, the Italian economy, the fourth largest in the EU (including the UK) has stagnated and barely grown all.

The total increase in output in that time has been just three per cent. To place this in context, Britain’s economy has expanded by 35 per cent over the same period. In France, no significant growth has been seen since 2011.

In each of the past five years, output has been negligible at below one per cent, a figure too low to support any new jobs.Enterprise has been crushed by the unreformed labour markets which have sparked a series of damaging recent strikes.

And President Hollande’s high taxation has driven tens of thousands of French citizens overseas. As for Germany, in the immediate aftermath of the financial crisis it prospered while its euro area neighbours suffered.

But the meltdown in the eurozone had a huge long-term impact on German production, because it has not been able to export so many of its costly cars to southern Europe where no one could afford to buy them.

The cruellest legacy of the eurozone has been the large-scale unemployment across the 19 member countries (with just a few exceptions). At 10.2 per cent, the average jobless rate across the region is twice that of Britain and the United States. The average disguises huge inequalities across the region, of course.

At the bottom of the pile is Greece, where more than a quarter of the workforce is on the dole — placing enormous strains on the benefits system. Even worse, the youth jobless rate stands at 50 per cent, condemning generations of young people to lives of misery.

Spain is now showing signs of recovery, yet youth unemployment there remains staggeringly high at 46 per cent. Italy also is badly hurt by a youth unemployment rate of 36.9 per cent, with few prospects of jobs as the economy slumps amid enormous poverty in the poorer southern region, and in Sardinia, one of the most socially deprived areas of the country.

France, meanwhile, is struggling to reform its labour laws to make them more flexible, causing angry industrial disputes which have caused nationwide transport chaos.

The overall jobless rate remains twice that of the UK. The only big exception in the eurozone is Germany, where an ageing population means there is nearly full employment. Conversely, the shortage of labour in Germany explains the open-door policy Chancellor Angela Merkel extended to migrants from the Middle East and beyond.

Fury: Citizens across Europe protest about being left impoverished. Pictured are demonstrators in Portugal where austerity has followed bailouts  

Huge, unmanageable budget deficits mean that many of the 19 eurozone countries are in breach of the conditions of EU membership, which restrict government borrowing to 3 per cent of national output. And the downward economic spiral is desperately hard to escape.

Low growth means smaller tax revenues and ever-increasing welfare budgets.

In contrast to the UK, which is working to balance its budget by 2019-2020, many European governments have no prospect of doing so, thus making their public finances increasingly precarious.

IMF figures show that Belgium, home of the EU’s Brussels headquarters, has debts alone which represent 106.8 per cent of the country’s output. In socialist-run France, the debt at 98.2 per cent is almost equal to total wealth, in Spain it’s at 127.9 per cent, in Italy at a whopping 133 per cent, and in Greece at a mammoth 178.4 per cent.

The attempts to pay off these massive debts are an ongoing crisis gnawing away at Europe’s future.

European data shows that only Britain and Ireland have been expanding their trade with non-EU markets in recent years. Some 44.6 per cent of UK exports still go to the EU, but that is a big drop from 54.8 per cent in 1999. In fact, UK trade with the rest of the world expanded consistently between 1999 and 2014.

In contrast, instead of looking outwards to the new digitally connected world, Europe’s trade is increasingly inwardly focused.

Data from the EU’s statistics service, Eurostat, shows that more than 62 per cent of the goods exported by EU member states have been to other states within the European bloc.

Nationalist: Austerity measures have led to a rise in popularity for the far right, particularly in places like Greece, where the Golden Dawn have seen a surge in membership 

Germany’s success in selling to its 27 European partners is the source of enormous, destabilising imbalances as it accumulates wealth at the expense of the other countries.

But instead of using its vast reserves to assist development and investment among its partners, it has been unforgiving of poor nations in the eurozone, not least in its refusal to allow ailing Greece more time to repay its huge national debts.

Even the IMF now says that if membership of the euro area is to become more attractive, greater help must be given to countries with high debt.

Germany’s harsh management of the purse strings has been instrumental in the economic dislocation which has fuelled ugly Right-wing movements such as Front National in France, Golden Dawn in Greece, the Freedom Party in Austria and the virulently racist Jobbik party in Hungary.

In short, the EU and the eurozone is a club where nothing works and where debts are piled so high that there is virtually no room for any fiscal manoeuvre.

Germany is so powerful that no other country can stand up to its control of the levers of power, both in Brussels and through the European Central Bank in Frankfurt, where it is the dominant force.

Britain’s exporters voted with their feet and embraced the rest of the world long before this referendum came into view. But then they have little choice.

Focusing on trade with a European economic area already shaken to its foundations offers a future of doom and despair.

 

