David Cameron has 'colluded' with the EU and is 'lying' to British voters over the EU, Iain Duncan Smith blasted today. 

The former work and pensions secretary reacted with fury to the confirmation from the Turkish government it saw Mr Cameron as the 'chief supporter' of its EU bid.

Vote Leave also claimed ex-PM Sir John Major had admitted today Turkish membership was possible within the lifetime of children at school today despite Mr Cameron's claims it will not happen before the year 3000.

Turkey's possible membership of the EU has dominated much of the referendum campaign as Vote Leave warned the country's accession would mean even higher levels of net migration. 

Iain Duncan Smith today accused David Cameron of 'colluding' with the EU over Turkey and claimed he was 'lying' to the British people 

Mr Duncan Smith said: 'David Cameron has repeatedly claimed that Turkey is not going to join the EU despite it being Government policy. Now the Turkish government has confirmed that he is the 'chief supporter' of their bid to join the EU.

'Cameron also said that Turkey will not join until the year 3000 but Sir John Major has let the cat out of the bag - Turkey could be in the EU in ten years' time.

'I'm afraid there is no conclusion you can draw from this, except that David Cameron is colluding with the EU and lying to the British people.

'Families are suffering the consequences of uncontrolled migration - a direct result of the EU's obsession with freedom of movement.

'They are suffering from downward pressure on their wages, and facing increased competition for housing, school places, and GP appointments to name but a few.

'With five more countries lining up to join the EU - Albania, Serbia, Montenegro, Macedonia, and Turkey - this problem can only get worse.

'That's why it is safer to Vote Leave.'

Sir John Major, pictured today at an eve-of-poll rally, said Turkey would not join within decades but Vote Leave said this implied a much sooner timetable than admitted to by David Cameron 
