LIE ONE: Giving jobless migrants the boot 'is a myth'

Former Work and Pensions Secretary Iain Duncan Smith, pictured, said Mr Cameron knew his claim about kicking out jobless migrants was 'not true'

By Jack Doyle, Political Correspondent for the Daily Mail 

David Cameron was last night accused of ‘treating voters with contempt’ after he repeated ‘false’ claims about kicking out jobless migrants.

Twice yesterday the Prime Minister said EU migrants have to leave the country if they don’t have a job after six months.

Mr Cameron has used the claim repeatedly during the referendum campaign despite it being rubbished both by the Leave camp and independent economists.

Last night, Jonathan Portes, an economist and former civil servant, said the PM was guilty of ‘repeating a known falsehood’.

He wrote on Twitter: ‘What can you say? Deliberately repeating a known falsehood. Treating voters with contempt. Let’s be clear. Vote to Remain is vote for free movement. Principle is not up for discussion.’

Mr Portes has said the number of people kicked out under the six-month rule has been ‘zero’.

And former Work and Pensions Secretary Iain Duncan Smith told the Mail: ‘The claim is not true, and he knows it. The truth is there is no mechanism, and no legal right to send people home if they do not have a job.

‘The European Union’s core principle of freedom of movement dictates that people are free not only to travel here, but to remain. And for as long as we remain in the EU we are powerless to do anything about it.

‘The only way to take back control of our borders, and introduce a fair immigration system, is to vote leave today.’

When he was in office, civil servants told Mr Duncan Smith the chances of removing an EU citizen from Britain if they do not get a job after six months was ‘close to zero’.

He said Whitehall officials told him migrants can easily get around the regulations, and that the Home Office admitted it did not have the staff or the capacity to enforce it.

Mr Cameron used the claim yesterday on Radio 4. Today presenter John Humphrys put to him that on benefits, his EU renegotiation ‘doesn’t add up to a row of beans’.

The PM replied: ‘Well it does. What it means is that if people come here they can’t claim unemployment benefit, if they don’t have a job after six months they have to leave and if they do work they have to work for four years before they get full access to our welfare system.’

Again, later in the day, Mr Cameron told LBC radio: ‘If you vote Remain then we get the changes that I have negotiated and that means that if somebody comes to Britain from the European Union, they can’t claim unemployment benefit.

‘If they haven’t got a job after six months they have to leave.’

Mr Cameron claimed credit for the rule change, saying it was secured as part of his renegotiation ‘deal’.

But last night the Home Office said the six-months rule was introduced on January 1, 2014.

Mr Duncan Smith was in charge of implementing the rule change as Work and Pensions Secretary.

But he said the Home Office told him they were unable to force anyone to leave as a result of not having secured a job.

Vote Leave argue that as well as there being no mechanism for monitoring whether or not jobseekers remain in the UK after this period has elapsed, EU law forbids systematic checks on whether EU citizens are lawfully residing in the UK.

The European Court of Justice has ruled jobseekers cannot be removed irrespective of how long they have been here if they can show they are ‘continuing to seek employment and that has genuine chances of being engaged’.

The Home Office was unable to provide a figure for the number of EU migrants removed under the rule.