IE FOUR: You won't get more borders reform - EU chief says PM got 'maximum deal'

By John Stevens for the Daily Mail 

Britain will not gain any more reform of immigration rules whether Remain or Leave wins, the EU’s top bureaucrat warned last night.

Jean-Claude Juncker flatly rejected making further changes to freedom of movement rules that enable the EU’s 500million citizens to come to the UK.

The European Commission president said David Cameron had been given the ‘maximum’ reform he could get in his widely-derided deal with Brussels.

Jean-Claude Juncker flatly rejected making further changes to freedom of movement rules that enable the EU’s 500million citizens to come to the UK. Pictured, Mr Juncker with Mr Cameron

The Prime Minister has been telling voters he will be able to reform EU migration rules if they choose to vote Remain.

The agreement by EU leaders made some changes to benefit entitlements for migrants but did not touch freedom of movement rules.

Mr Juncker, a former prime minister of Luxembourg, said yesterday: ‘There will be no kind of any negotiation’, adding: [Mr Cameron] got the maximum he could receive, and we gave the maximum we could give, so there will be no kind of renegotiation on the agreement we found in February or as far as any kind of treaty negotiation is concerned. Out is out.’

Earlier in the day, Mr Cameron had said: in an interview: ‘Reform doesn’t end on Friday. The only way it ends is if we leave.’ Asked whether he could guarantee he would push for tougher migration controls, he said: ‘Yes of course. This is an ongoing process.’

Justice Secretary Michael Gove told voters last night said: ‘If you vote to stay there is no prospect of getting any reform from the EU ever again.

‘The Prime Minister tried to get reforms earlier this year but the EU did not listen. The EU cannot and will not give the British people the change that they want.’

Boris Johnson, the former London mayor, said: ‘I was very struck to see what President Juncker said – that if Britain thought it was going to get any more change from the EU we had another think coming.’

Mr Johnson added: ‘The idea that we can do better by staying in the EU and fighting for change is, I’m afraid, a sham, a snare and a delusion.’

Actress Liz Hurley was leaving little to the imagination yesterday... as she encouraged Britain to vote Leave.

She urged her social media followers to go for Brexit by releasing a saucy picture of her smiling with just a Union Jack cushion to cover her modesty.

The star wrote alongside the image: ‘Vote tomorrow – whatever your persuasion. I’m for #Brexit & promise to neither gloat nor whinge. But VOTE!’

Liz Hurley urged her social media followers to go for Brexit by releasing a saucy picture of her smiling with just a Union Jack cushion to cover her modesty

Miss Hurley, 51, uploaded the image, taken as a cover shot for the Mail on Sunday’s You Magazine in 2011, to her Twitter and Instagram accounts where it was quickly ‘liked’ and retweeted thousands of times.

Some jokingly commented that the cheeky photo of the former model alone was enough to make them vote Leave.

On Twitter, one user said: ‘I would say this is the ultimate campaign poster.’

Another posted: ‘Thanks Liz, I was going to vote remain, but seeing you with that cushion, I am for Brexit. I am born anew in your wisdom.’

IAIN DUNCAN SMITH: What a cynical exercise in hiding the truth

Today, the country has the chance to return the Government of Britain back to the UK. More than that, we have the chance to end the corruption of our politics.

This corruption of the democratic process is best exemplified by how our leaders have reacted to Turkey’s wish to join the EU.

Although he now claims there is no chance of Turkey joining (allowing its 77 million citizens free movement to the UK), why did the Prime Minister refuse on FOUR occasions to say he’d use the British veto to stop it happening? There are several other contradictions.

Iain Duncan Smith: 'The country has the chance to return the Government of Britain back to the UK'

If Turkey won’t join ‘until about the year 3000’ (as the PM has said), why is there a special team at the British embassy in Ankara helping Turkey to join?

And why are hundreds of millions of pounds of British taxpayers’ money being spent to support the accession of Turkey (as well as Albania, Serbia, Macedonia and Montenegro) to the EU?

Equally, why are Brussels officials busy negotiating key financial aspects of Turkey’s accession before Christmas?

All this confirms the fact that Turkey’s accession to the European Union is both British and EU policy.

Furthermore, the PM knows that the deal struck with the Ankara government earlier this year to stop migrants using Turkey as a jumping-off point to pour into Greece – and thus enable them to travel to any other EU country – was done in exchange for the Turkish government getting £4.6billion in aid (£1billion from the UK), visa-free access for Turks to mainland Europe and accelerated entry to the EU.

The Prime Minister is also fully aware that if we try to pull out of the deal, Turkey would inevitably start to allow migrants travelling to EU countries from its shores again – creating similar chaos to that which occurred last year.

The truth is that Turkey has the European Union over a barrel and the British Government knows it.

Most cynically, the Brussels Commission has been holding back announcements about Turkey until after the UK referendum on membership of the EU. But yesterday the fact was leaked that it will start negotiations on Turkey’s entry into the EU a week today – after the British people have voted.

As much as the PM suggests otherwise, the issue of Turkey and the future of its 77 million population ought to be in voters’ minds today as they enter the polling booth.