'Only a few lunatics want to join the EU now': Switzerland WITHDRAWS application to become a European Union member state one week before the Brexit vote

Politicians in Switzerland have voted to withdraw the country's long-standing European Union application, a week before Britain decides on its own EU membership.

Thomas Minder, counsellor for Schaffhausen state and an active promoter of the concept of 'Swissness,' told Neue Zürcher Zeitung he was eager to 'close the topic fast and painlessly' as only 'a few lunatics' may want to join the EU now.



A total of 27 members of parliament's upper house voted to invalidate the 1992 application, backing up an earlier decision by the lower house. Only 13 senators voted against while two abstained.

Switzerland first applied to join the EU in 1992 but after 24 years will now give formal notice to Brussels

The original motion, introduced by the conservative Swiss People’s Party MP, Lukas Reimann, received overwhelming support from law-makers in the lower house back in March, with 126 National Council deputies voting in favor, 46 against.

Switzerland will now give formal notice to the EU to consider its application withdrawn, the country’s foreign minister, Didier Burkhalter, was quoted as saying by the paper. 

Hannes Germann, also representing Schaffhausen, compared the symbolic importance to Iceland’s decision to drop its membership bid in 2015.

Switzerland’s long-standing application to join has had little impact on domestic politics for more than 20 years

“Iceland had the courage and withdrew the application for membership, so no volcano erupted,” he said.



Switzerland’s long-standing application to join has had little impact on domestic politics for more than 20 years, after it suspended accession negotiations in 1992, following a referendum to join the European Economic Area.

However, the Swiss public narrowly rejected EEA membership.

Some have even argued that the vote was unnecessary because the EU no longer regards Switzerland as an official candidate to join.

Filippo Lombardi, from the Christian Democratic People’s Party, said  it was 'not very clever to discuss it once again,' calling the whole thing 'a bit ridiculous'.

Switzerland, never a member of EU, shares free trade with the union and free movement of people as part of the Schengen zone.

The British public will have their say on their own country's EU membership through a hotly-anticipated referendum on Thursday



