Britain is great, we are all very polite (but there are too many illegal immigrants): Europeans living here have their say on Brexit vote 

European immigrants living in London have had their say on Brexit with just two days to go before the big vote. 

The group, which included shop workers, musicians and academics, are concerned that business could struggle and European travel won't be as easy if the Leave side wins. 

But there are also fears over illegal immigration and a belief that the UK is strong enough to go it alone.

For Raluca Cioroianu, freedom of movement within the European Union is not something she takes for granted.

Vera Pereira, a Portuguese double bass player with a British orchestra, in Borough, London, she has concerns orchestras may not be able to tour as much if the UK leaves the EU

Raluca Cioroianu from Romania at the farm where she is a shop manager in Addlestone. She said she is not 'ashamed' to say that she is from Romania as the UK goes to the polls

Paolo Esposito, an Italian national working in financial services, on a footbridge over the River Thames, said British attitudes to immigrants will not change if there is a Brexit 

When she was growing up in communist Romania, it was difficult to travel abroad, but as an adult, after her country joined the EU, she was able to move to Britain where she has built a good life for herself.

Now, with the EU vote on Thursday, Cioroianu finds it hard to understand why so many want to leave a club that gives them free access to a whole continent.

Cioroianu, who works as a shop supervisor at a farm, said: 'If you were a teenager from the UK, you could just take your passport and go. We couldn't do that.'

Immigration has been one of the central topics of the EU referendum debate. Those campaigning for a Leave vote say the government is powerless to control numbers arriving because of EU freedom of movement rules.

'I came here with good intentions, to work, to pay taxes, to improve my knowledge, my culture, and to make a better life,' Cioroianu added. 'I'm not ashamed to say that I'm from Romania.'

For Catarina Cardoso, a Portuguese academic specialising in climate change who lives in London with her German husband and three children, the EU referendum debate has made a difference to how she feels about being an immigrant.

'Until now we were the same as everyone else, maybe a different accent, but it didn't seem to be an issue,' she said

'Now you don't know whether you're welcome.'

The family had not previously considered leaving. They like Britain and its way of life and are settled at work and at school. 

'But if Britain exits the EU then I suppose we'll have to think about it,' Cardoso added.

Monika Cyrek, a Polish national who works in a grocery store run by her mother selling mostly products from her homeland, also feels Brexit would make the Polish community feel less welcome. 

Svenja Schumacher, a German national working for a London financial services firm, near the London Eye, wants to vote in the referendum 

Simeon Simeonov, a Bulgarian car washer, poses for a photograph in Weybridge said people who support Leave are 'thinking like in the last century'

'If we're not wanted here, probably a lot of people will leave and try other places,' she said.

A more urgent concern though is how a Brexit would affect the family business. 'I don't know if it will make it harder for us to bring goods from Poland,' she added.

Vera Pereira, a Portuguese double bass player with a British orchestra, worries about the impact a Brexit would have on Britain's music scene, one of its main attractions for her.

'Orchestras may not be able to tour as much. I'm afraid other countries in Europe won't listen to British orchestras as often and the world of music in Britain won't be as well known as it is now. In 20 years we'll see the result,' she said.

Fellow musician Jessie Grimes, an Irish clarinettist, said her time playing with the EU Youth Orchestra a few years ago brought home the advantages of being part of the bloc.

'Being in that orchestra made me feel quite European and understand that unity is important because we had amazing musicians from all over Europe,' she said.

Monika Cyrek, a Polish national who works in a grocery store run by her mother that sells mostly Polish products, thinks a lot of immigrants will leave if the UK votes for Brexit 

Mihai Marcar, a Romanian waiter at a garden centre restaurant, is worried about the number of immigrants who are in the UK illegally 

Grimes is concerned that a post-EU Britain may have to re-instate border controls between the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland, which is part of the United Kingdom. 

'I can't see that going peacefully,' she said, recalling the political violence that blighted Northern Ireland when she was a child.

Grimes also cares about gay rights and says it would be a shame for Britain, which allows gay marriage and adoption, to lose the possibility of influencing less progressive EU nations.

'You can only do good by staying,' she said.

Uniquely among non-British EU nationals, Irish citizens living in Britain are allowed to vote in the referendum, and Grimes has cast her postal ballot to remain. 

Svenja Schumacher, a German national working for a London financial services firm, wishes she could have a say. 'I don't think it's fair that I don't have a vote. I pay taxes in Britain,' she said.

She thinks that growing up in Germany made her feel a lot more European than most Britons do. 'When I was at school I had student exchanges with France, Italy, Spain. We learnt quite a few European languages. We learnt about the EU, European law, the whole set-up,' she said. 

'Here the discussions you read in the press are mainly about what economic benefits Britain takes out of the EU and not what the EU stands for, things like freedom, security, solidarity.'

Simeon Simeonov, a Bulgarian car cleaner, puts it more bluntly: 'They're thinking like in the last century,' he says of those campaigning for a Brexit.

Catarina Cardoso, a Portuguese academic specialising in climate change who lives in London with her German husband and their three children. She said since the EU campaign began she has been concerned her family are not 'welcome' in the country

Jessie Grimes, an Irish clarinettist, in west London thinks there may have to be border controls between the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland if the Leave campaign wins

He came to Britain with his Bulgarian wife to give their two children a chance for a better life. His main fear about a Brexit is that it might stop them from continuing their education at a local British state school.

Mihai Marcar, a Romanian waiter at a garden centre restaurant, wants to stay in Britain come what may.

'As soon as I came here, I was in love with the British way of life. This 'hello, how are you? Thank you very much', it attracted me very much. This British gentleman style,' he says.

Marcar has been dismayed by the negative tone of much of the debate about immigration, particularly from eastern Europe. He feels hard-working, productive people are being unfairly stigmatised because of a minority who are not like that.

'I think there are a lot of people who are here illegally. For me that's the real problem, not the people who are working here, paying taxes, having a normal life.'

Paolo Esposito, an Italian national working in financial services, says he has 'zero concern' about attitudes towards European residents changing in the event of a Brexit because of the welcoming, cosmopolitan character of London, where he lives.

'I wasn't expecting it to be so easy to settle. From simple things like bureaucracy, which is a lot more straightforward than in Italy, to people's attitudes towards foreigners. Looking back on it, it was less hassle than changing your gym,' he says.

'I'm definitely settled, with a ring, a mortgage, a British baby.'

Esposito thinks there may be professional consequences from a Brexit, due to the impact on financial services and on the British economy, but says: 'If it happens, I'm sure we'll survive the storm.' 

