Chris Grayling: If Britain votes to leave the EU, the first thing is that there is no need to panic. Nothing changes the day after and until the formal leaving process is over

The real answer lies with the Prime Minister and the Government. But as Leave campaigners, we must give some answers too.

The first thing is that there is no need to panic. Nothing changes the day after and until the formal leaving process is over.

The commonly accepted way to leave is in Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty, the document governing the EU. 

We give notice and then have two years to agree our future relationship. After that, we leave automatically unless we and our partners agree to take longer.

So the starting point should be a period of informal preparation. The Prime Minister should set up the negotiating team, preferably with a cross-party element.

He should have informal talks with other EU leaders. We should state clearly that while we will leave the EU, we will remain co-operative neighbours and continue to work side by side in organisations such as Nato.

The Prime Minister’s position remains immensely important. It’s why I have always said he must stay on in the event of a Brexit vote.

He will play a vital role in maintaining stability in the markets, and his personal relationships with other EU leaders will be invaluable. Then the formal process begins.

The first priority is talks on trade. Other EU countries may be upset, but they will come round in the end.

The Prime Minister’s position remains immensely important. It’s why I have always said he must stay on in the event of a Brexit vote

Money and jobs are always a priority for politicians, and we are their biggest customer. European businesses will want to retain free-trade access to the UK – their biggest export market.

One in five cars built in Germany is sold here. Thousands of French farmers produce food for the UK.

In the end, it will be in everyone’s interests to agree a free-trade relationship. The formal period for the exit talks is two years. There is no reason why this should be difficult.

It may have taken seven years for the EU and Canada to reach a trade deal. But they had to negotiate new industrial standards and rules.

We have no such issues. UK businesses already conform to EU standards. The deal can be done quickly.

Then there will be changes to our laws, for example the scrapping of the Act of Parliament that took us into the EU.

At the end of all of this, people will still holiday in Spain or travel round Europe.

Airlines will fly as normal. You’ll still buy French cheese or Italian wine. Roaming charges will continue to disappear.

London will remain a great cosmopolitan city. Companies will still sell their products to people around Europe, as they do now.

But from the moment we leave, our £350 million a week EU subscription stops, giving us extra cash for priorities such as the NHS.

We take back control of our laws and Britain will be a proud independent nation again.

Chris Grayling is Conservative MP for Epsom and Ewell, and the Leader of the Commons.
