One of Britain’s best-known companies last night warned staff its future could be placed under threat if we remain in the EU.

In a highly unusual move,  Tate & Lyle Sugars wrote to its 800 UK staff warning that ‘EU restrictions and tariffs’ had added £30 million to its raw material costs last year.

This turned ‘what should have been a good profit, that we would all share, into a £19 million loss’, the firm said.

Gerald Mason (right, with  Zac Goldsmith, centre, on a visit) told staff that EU tariffs on a single boatload of cane sugar could top £2.5 million. In a highly unusual move, sugar giant Tate & Lyle (pictured, north London) wrote to its 800 UK staff warning that ‘EU restrictions and tariffs’ had added £30 million to its raw material costs last year.

The company’s senior vice-president Gerald Mason told staff that EU tariffs on a single boatload of cane sugar could top £2.5 million.

He said the situation was made worse by the fact that Brussels officials ‘then send that money to subsidise our beet sugar-producing competitors in Europe’.

In a further damaging blow to David Cameron, Britain’s leading entrepreneur Sir James Dyson last night stepped up his call for Britain to leave the EU, warning that remaining in the Brussels club would be ‘an act of national self-harm’.

Sir James said the Prime Minister’s claim that Britain could go on to reform the EU was ‘pure fantasy’.

And he warned that the EU’s free movement rules had created an immigration system that made ‘no economic or moral sense’.

He went on: ‘There is a perception that having a seat at the EU table means Britain has influence. As David Cameron discovered in his recent attempt at renegotiation, we don’t.

‘There are 27 other countries at the same table with their own conflicting interests. It’s ungovernable and undemocratic. To think we can reform Brussels is arrogant and delusional - it is pure fantasy.’

The entrepreneur added: ‘I can confirm that we have no influence whatsoever in the shaping of Europe’s protectionist laws and regulations. Believe me, we’ve tried.

‘Consider immigration, which the United Kingdom should benefit from greatly. We need immigration, but we also need to be able to control it.

In a further damaging blow to David Cameron, Britain’s leading entrepreneur Sir James Dyson last night stepped up his call for Britain to leave the EU

‘It makes no economic or moral sense to ignore the world beyond Europe. Yet, we are forced to accept people from Europe without limit, while turning away economically vital engineers and scientists from the rest of the world.

‘This is the last opportunity to regain control of our futures. If we vote Remain, make no mistake, we lose control. This would be an act of national self-harm.’