Stop promising the impossible, Prime Minister! Cameron should drop his 'irresponsible' pledge to cut immigration to tens of thousands, says leading Brexiteer 

David Cameron should drop his promise to get net immigration down to the tens of thousands because it is untenable within the EU, a leading Labour Brexiteer said today.

Gisela Stuart, a chairwoman of Vote Leave, said it was irresponsible of the Prime Minister to repeatedly make promises to the electorate he knows he cannot keep.

Mr Cameron has defended the pledge - downgraded from a policy promise to an ambition in last year's manifesto - during the referendum campaign as both possible and not something which Brexit would achieve.

But Ms Stuart today said the pledge was 'corrosive' to public trust and should be abandoned by politicians committed to staying in the EU. 

Gisela Stuart, left during a referendum TV debate, has been the leading Brexit campaigner for the Labour Party and she today demanded the PM give up his promise to cut migration to the tens of thousands 

She said: 'It is clear that it will be impossible to reduce net migration below 100,000 if we vote to stay in the EU.

'The Prime Minister must now make clear that he will abandon this manifesto pledge if he wins the referendum on Thursday.

'He cannot continue to promise to do something that he knows is impossible.

'Inside the EU we don't control our borders and cannot control the movement of people coming here from the EU.'

Mr Cameron was repeatedly challenged on immigration in last night's BBC Question Time special.

But he told angry audience members: 'Is it really worth leaving the single market, damaging our economy, to make progress with this issue?

'There is no silver bullet on this issue. There is no simple way.' 



Challenged by presenter David Dimbleby that leaving the EU would in fact be a 'silver bullet', the premier insisted it would not be that simple.

'I am explaining why it has been a difficult thing to do,' he said. 



David Cameron, pictured today on a campaign visit to the Mini factory with Harriet Harman, a day after another live TV debate where he scrambled to convince voters Brexit was not a 'silver bullet' to solve problems

Elsewhere in the immigration debate in the finals hours before the referendum, Nigel Farage today claimed he only withdrew a poster branded 'racist' by critics because of the 'unfortunate timing' of its publication just two hours before the killing of MP Jo Cox.

The Ukip leader repeated his dismissal of cross-party condemnation of the poster, which feature a column of thousands of refugees and migrants trying to walk into Europe through Slovenia. 

Mr Farage today insisted he had published a similar poster in May and said the image - headlined 'breaking point' - was a fair comment on the pressures faced by the 'Schengen' borderless zone on the continent.



The Remain campaign issued an immediate cross-party condemnation of the poster within minutes of its publication last Thursday morning and senior Leave campaigner Michael Gove led new criticism yesterday as he admitted it had made him 'shudder'.

But Mr Farage today stood by his defence of the poster - hours after insisting he was himself the 'victim' of hatred.

 

